phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Best RNG for filling memory?

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p4bOsn-gE89Re2t641tevtJrG6C4RroJPTFDuaa1F2UNA@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Wed, 25 Dec 2013 14:10:39 -0500
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Best RNG for filling memory?

Wow, this stuff is a *lot* more interesting than I thought at first, but
that's pretty typical when working on hard problems.  My version of my
hashing function from yesterday had me pretty happy when I went to bed, but
Xmas morning, I woke up realising I had at least two rookie flaws.

First, my page size is currently 16KB, small enough to fit on low-end ARM
L1 caches, yet large enough to mitigate cache miss penalties.  The problem
with using a page size larger than a cache line and the RNG state is that
instead of having external DRAM, a custom ASIC could just store the state
of the RNG needed to generate that page, on-chip, and re-generate the page
data as needed, without any external DRAM at all.  The state for MARC4 is
256 bytes + 3 8-bit indexes, which is a whole lot smaller than 16KB.  Other
RNGs have even smaller state.  So, we want to fill the DRAM pipe
efficiently without a lot of cache miss penalties, so we need to read large
pages.  On the other hand, we can't allow those pages to be re-generated
on-chip from less data than is on the page.  I haven't figured this one out
yet, but it's fun to think about.  Maybe having a whole page of RNG state
could work...

Second, I only used the salt to initialize the RNG, hoping that I could
better protect the password in case the large memory array got cached to
disk.  I'm not that comfortable having 1GB of MARC4 data out there to be
analyzed to try and guess the key.  However, writing to memory is slower
because of page allocation while we fill memory than reading memory later.
 A common case is likely to be when users what to write to a lot of memory,
and then just randomly hash through it once, as this maximizes the cost of
the external RAM to do the hashing while minimizing runtime for that much
memory.  An attacker could initialize the RAM from the salt, and then do
only the second part - the hashing - once per password guess, cutting the
time by over 2X per guess.  While that might not be a killer, I suspect all
the good entries into this contest will be free of such flaws.  So, how do
I force the entire memory to depend on the password without risking some
attack on the stream itself?  One way would be to use a better cipher than
MARC4.  Is Blake2 considered a better RNG without long term correlations
like ARC4?  Or would it be better just to keep the password from impacting
what we write to DRAM at all, and accept the improved attack?



