phc-discussions - RE: [PHC] Terminology goals

Message-ID: <fdea2b74ed05475f9dbd5c6ba656dc45@BLUPR03MB166.namprd03.prod.outlook.com>
Date: Mon, 9 Sep 2013 19:33:40 +0000
From: Marsh Ray <maray@...rosoft.com>
To: "discussions@...sword-hashing.net" <discussions@...sword-hashing.net>
Subject: RE: [PHC] Terminology goals

When I do a web search for 'slowest hash function', I get a mixture of results. Some are recommending bcrypt and scrypt, some are benchmarks comparing MD5, SHA-1, and SHA-2, etc.

Speaking as a guy who was a corporate developer in a past life, making a living writing data entry dialog boxes for databases:

One of the best gifts our project could give to the community is a new term which unambiguously embodies the security properties needed for the storage and verification of password-based credentials. A developer can write this term on a napkin, search for it when he gets back to his desk, and have the best chance of finding an implementation for his platform that lets him succeed in doing the right thing.

The simpler, the less ambiguous, and the more widely-accepted this term becomes, the more applications will store their passwords-based credentials securely.

- Marsh



-----Original Message-----
From: Solar Designer [mailto:solar@...nwall.com]
Sent: Saturday, September 7, 2013 7:26 AM
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Terminology goals

On Fri, Sep 06, 2013 at 10:42:40PM -0700, Tony Arcieri wrote:
What about calling them slow hashes?

FWIW, this is what we've been calling them in John the Ripper development
and usage context for a few years now, because we needed to differentiate
"fast" and "slow" hashes (of the hash types that JtR
supports) when talking about program structure, optimizations, usage
instructions (need to bother avoiding occasional duplicate candidate
passwords or not, etc).

A "slow" hash might not include a builtin salting mechanism (although in
practice they almost always do), whereas for PHC this is a requirement.
Yet I am fine with the "slow hashes" term.

That said, in PHC context, we've already started using "PHS", so perhaps we
should stick with that.

Alexander

