phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] C99 in reference implementations

Message-ID: <20130810190148.GT221@brightrain.aerifal.cx>
Date: Sat, 10 Aug 2013 15:01:48 -0400
From: Rich Felker <dalias@...ifal.cx>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] C99 in reference implementations

On Sat, Aug 10, 2013 at 01:45:01PM -0400, Daniel Franke wrote:
I have a reference implementation of a prospective PHC entry written in
"portable" C99. By "portable", I mean that it uses only standard C99
language features, has no external library dependencies, and should
produce identical output regardless of host CPU architecture. However,
it makes extensive use of C99 language features, including
<stdint.h>/<stdbool.h>, mixed declarations and code, and variable-length
arrays. Taking advantage of these features significantly improves
readability, but will prevent the code from compiling on MSVC and any
other compilers with poor C99 support. Does/should this pass muster for
PHC submission requirements?

Personally, I think the fact that C99 is nearly 15 years old and not
even the current version of the standard anymore is sufficient
justification to say "C" means a language which includes all C99
features (except perhaps those which C11 made optional).

With that said, some practical considerations:

- Use of VLA objects is usually a security bug, unless the size is
  highly bounded, in which case a plain non-VL array would work just
  fine. The only place VLA should be used in secure code is for
  pointer-to-VLA types (e.g. int (*mat)[n] = calloc(n, sizeof *mat);)
  which are very useful in certain mathematical applications.

- If you want to support a wide range of compilers, including badly
  outdated ones, mixed declarations and code and stdbool.h are just
  gratuitous non-portability. You can always reorder your
  declarations, and bool offers no functional advantages over int with
  "the !! operator". These features should only be used if you really
  don't care about bad compilers and you think the readability
  advantages are worthwhile. Personally, I don't find the bool type
  idiomatic in C; I find its semantics are confusing to C programmers
  not used to it.

- Even code targetting pre-C99 compilers should always use stdint.h
  for fixed-size types. If the compiler lacks stdint.h, all you have
  to do to fix the problem is drop in an appropriate stdint.h file in
  your source tree. Since there's roughly one relevant platform
  (MSVC/Windows) affected by this, you don't even need to bother with
  multiple versions of the drop-in file; just hard-coding it to MSVC
  should be fine. Rejecting stdint.h and using your own system of
  finding proper exact-sized types tends to make your code a lot less
  portable.

Rich

