phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] An additional PHS API to include a string?

Message-ID: <20140831144042.GY12888@brightrain.aerifal.cx>
Date: Sun, 31 Aug 2014 10:40:43 -0400
From: Rich Felker <dalias@...c.org>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] An additional PHS API to include a string?

On Sun, Aug 31, 2014 at 10:26:10AM -0400, Bill Cox wrote:
- String encoding for the output is fine, but you must also mind 
the input. Password hashing is about hashing passwords (duh), and 
passwords tend to be sequences of characters. Invariably, any 
password hashing function begins by converting a sequence of 
characters into bytes. C-based implementations often assume that 
the conversion has already been done, but this is a known source
of bugs; famously, one widespread implementation of bcrypt had
trouble processing non-ASCII characters, and I saw the same bug in
PGP 5.5 code (because of assumptions on the signedness of the
'char' C type).

I've written Unicode-32 to UTF-8 before.  It is a bit
tricky.

The other direction is slightly tricky if it's your first time, but if
you follow the BNF and implement based on a DFA rather than naive bit
hacks, it's hard to get wrong. The direction you described (UTF-32 to
UTF-8) is quite trivial: for each valid range of UTF-32, there's a
fixed sequence of steps with no loops or other complex logic to
produce the output bytes.

I did a ton of automated testing vs the reference version
before I believed it worked.  This is not something that belongs
directly in the core of a password hashing function, as it's more
complicated than some of them, and highly error-prone.

I agree with you here, but for different reasons, mainly that the
source encoding will vary a lot by application. For C applications on
Unix-like systems (e.g. system logins) it's almost surely to be in
bytes already, but you can't impose a particular encoding at this
level; it's up to the system/configuration and there are still people
insisting on using their backwards Latin-1 and whatnot. For web apps,
the source is likely in whatever encoding is preferred by the language
used to write the app, and hopefully the language has a working method
for converting to UTF-8.

I think the implementations should assume the conversion has already
been done, and that the password is now simply key material in an
unsigned array of bytes which can include any value, even 0's.

I disagree about including '\0' bytes. Supporting them in some places
is a vulnerability waiting to happen, since they're likely to be
interpreted as end-of-string in other contexts. If the bindings for
the calling language use a byte-array that's capable of representing
embedded '\0' bytes, they should check for '\0' bytes and return an
error (or throw an exception, as appropriate for the language) before
passing the string on to the underlying hashing implementation.

Support for Microsoft's legacy Unicode-16 is something I would not
want to take on, but I'd vote in favor of supporting UTF-8 and
Unicode-32 formats.

Do you meant UTF-16 or UCS-2? The latter is trivial to support, but I
think the former is what's needed for a number of language bindings,
and not significantly more difficult.

We cannot ignore the non-Western world; thus, ISO-8859-1 
("latin-1") encoding is not appropriate. We have to embrace 
Unicode, which means UTF-8, UTF-16 or some other encoding. 
Unfortunately, humans have been extremely creative with regards to 
writing systems, which means ambiguity (e.g. even a simple "é" 
character has several possible decompositions in code points). 
Therefore, it seems best if any implementation of a password 
hashing function, in a language where strings are strings (i.e. 
almost all of them except C and C++), takes care to apply strictly 
defined and unambiguous encoding rules.

+1

+1, but I don't think this is easy. For example depending on the
application, this may involve Unicode normalization forms, and I don't
think processing them belongs at this level; it's complex and
error-prone. Do you have ideas on the matter?

Rich

