phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Re: Proposed changes to author's code

Message-ID: <20140406215311.GA18688@bolet.org>
Date: Sun, 6 Apr 2014 23:53:11 +0200
From: Thomas Pornin <pornin@...et.org>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Re: Proposed changes to author's code

On Sun, Apr 06, 2014 at 03:31:59PM -0400, Bill Cox wrote:
Also, I want to start recording some data for each entry that will
help in automated testing.  In particular the legal input ranges for
t_cost and m_cost.  It would also be great if the authors could let me
know their prefered t_cost and m_cost settings for the different modes
they support, for example L1 cache such as Blowfish, L1 or L2/L3 cache
such as Catena, L1 or L2/L3 or main memory such as Yescript.

For Makwa:

 -- Input length is arbitrary, including empty (length = 0)
 -- Salt length is arbitrary, including empty, which is of course not
    recommended. Normal salt length is 16 bytes, but that's just a
    convention.
 -- t_cost is the unique cost parameter. Computation time is proportional
    to that parameter; on my 2.7 GHz i7, computation time is about 1
    second when t_cost is close to 600000.
 -- m_cost is completely ignored.

Internally, the code will allocate a buffer in which both the input and
the salt are copied, so don't call the function with a salt or input
in the gigabyte range -- which would hardly make sense anyway. Salt
and input length do not noticeably impact computing time. The whole
processing remains in CPU L1 cache; Makwa is not memory-hard.


Mind the comments in makwa.h about the PHS() function, though.
Basically, this function is good only for tests. Makwa uses a RSA
modulus as parameter; for PHS(), this is a hardcoded modulus (in phc.c).
Since the factors for that modulus are not known, this misses out on
some of Makwa functionalities, such as the "fast path" and the escrow
system. More importantly, you would have to trust me for not having
saved these factors somewhere. I cannot logically prove that I did not
do exactly that.

Moreover, PHS() is hardcoded to use both pre- and post-hashing, which
is fine for what you intend to do (run statistical tests) but, again,
disables some other features (e.g. offline work factor increase).


Performance relies quite heavily on that of OpenSSL. On MacOS X machines,
the system-provided OpenSSL is old and slow; compiling a fresh one from
recent sources is highly recommended (we are talking about a factor of 5
or so here, which is not negligible at all).


For testing, I have access to my own machine, which is biased towards
my own TwoCats entry since that's where I tuned it, and probably also
Alexander's two machines he gave me accounts on, one a Haswell
processor, and the other a nice high-memory-bandwidth Sandybridge
server.  I don't know where else to test.

You may want to ask for an account on the GCC compile farm:
http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/CompileFarm

As long as the project is free software, this should not be problematic.
Since these machines are shared, you have to exercise some care when
running performance tests (i.e. check whether the machine is presently
idle, otherwise you may get skewed results).


	--Thomas Pornin

