phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Gambit review

Message-ID: <1721387777.20140404225812@gmail.com>
Date: Fri, 4 Apr 2014 22:58:12 +0200
From: Krisztián Pintér <pinterkr@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Gambit review

Bill Cox (at Friday, April 4, 2014, 10:37:43 PM):

No problem.  I'm enjoying reading everyone's code.  Sorry about being
a jerk sometimes.

i'm getting over it one day.

Did you use bit reversal before reading Catena?

i never published, so it does not count. i accidentally discovered the
good mixing property of bit reversal as a child, when i was looking
for an algorithm to calculate points of the mandelbrot set in an order
that gives me an overlook of the scene as soon as possible.

If you
like, I could add your memory pattern to my pebbling algorithm to see
how it does.

that would certainly be very useful, as it might discover some
weakness. alas, it can not provide a proof for real life sizes. i
tried to come up with proof, but i'm no math person.

  I am still trying to figure out what the impact is of
XORing over memory rather than overwriting it.

that one i can answer. if you overwrite, the slot becomes unused for a
while. i mean, once it has been read, and until it gets a new value,
it just sits there unused. at any point in time, a certain fraction of
the memory (and a quite huge fraction) is in this idle state. if you
cleverly reuse memory slots, you can run the algorithm with smaller
memory footprint. i prevent this by never discarding any value.

xoring could be omitted while absorbing (overwrite mode), but that
does not seem to gain much.

I still think there is maybe a 100X to 1000X potential cache access
speedup in an ASIC for predictable addressing,

predictable addressing is something i'm not willing to give up. it is
in my view an absolute necessity. i'd rather present a weaker
algorithm than one that can be cracked wide open using side channel
attacks.

Now that I've seen a couple entries that use the new AESENC

as soon az keccak-ni arrives in 2019 processors, you will be a fan of
gambit instead.


