phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Re: New password hashing entry: PolyPassHash

Message-ID: <CAMVss_oyo=WBecncqUjjjWtNRKb-H5EYrsc-WdvkkAOOVn0_XA@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Wed, 2 Apr 2014 19:26:06 -0400
From: Justin Cappos <jcappos@....edu>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Cc: santiago torres <sat417@...dents.poly.edu>
Subject: Re: [PHC] Re: New password hashing entry: PolyPassHash

>
The main advantage over multiple master keys is that it appears to be more
flexible.  Threshold accounts would be the administrator accounts, I
assume, and an attacker would need to compromise a number of those to
decrypt the database.  But it doesn't require an exact set of keys but
"anyone who is available."  I can't see an easy way to automatically
promote a threshold-less to a threshold account, but perhaps I missed
something from the paper.
>

Hmm, this wasn't something I implemented (or thought much about).

However, this is really easy to do.   Promoting an account can be done for
an unlocked data store by: unencrypting the salted hash, choosing an unused
share number, and then XOR this salted hash with the unused share.   Then
just store <username, salt, share number, (share XOR salted hash)>, just
like any other threshold entry.



Bootstrapping seems to be an issue, because a threshold of administrators
would have to help with a restart, as opposed to just one engineer
answering the 2 AM call.  The partial verification required otherwise seems
scary to me, but maybe that's just paranoia.
>

If you'd like the system to be authenticated by a single admin, you can do
that with PPH.   The advantages in this case are that you can revoke access
as admins leave in a normal way.   Also the admin passwords protect the
user passwords.   So if the admin chooses a strong password, the user
accounts can't be attacked.

So, PPH is good here, you just lose some of the extreme cracking resilience.

One other issue I see is that it cannot be used with SRP during the the
bootstrapping process, since the server won't be able to prove knowledge of
the keys unless I am missing something.  And that may also preclude SRP
from being used at all, because a server can just consistently "fake" being
in bootstrapping mode, negating the advantage of SRP.
>

I'm not an expert in SRP, so let me know if this is off base.   However,
other keys can be used to unlock the relevant shares.   So with SRP, the
server can store a random bitstring that was XORed with the share.   The
client can store the random bitstring.   After authentication, the client
can send the random bitstring to the server to let it unlock the share.

Does this make sense?

Thanks,
Justin



