phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Transforming hash to different cost setting

Message-ID: <532EA8BC.8030104@uni-weimar.de>
Date: Sun, 23 Mar 2014 10:26:20 +0100
From: Christian Forler <christian.forler@...-weimar.de>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Transforming hash to different cost setting

On 22.03.2014 12:04, Krisztián Pintér wrote:

Christian Forler (at Saturday, March 22, 2014, 11:17:34 AM):

>Companies will accept a transparency no-effort solution which improves
>the password hash security of their users. The will not delete old user
>data.

you keep mentioning deletion of user data. i restate that i was
talking about deleting password, not data. when the user comes back
after like a year of inactivity, he will simply be told that his
password was deleted for security reasons, and now he needs to go
through the usual forgotten password routine. users can also be
notified that in order to avoid this minor annoyance, they have to log
in at least every 6 months. that is not of anybody's concern. this
won't set your business back.


First of all, I do 100% agree with you on this topic. If you are abel to
"delete" password hashes of inactive users then do it.


But for many sales, controlling or management people, a password hash is
a part of the costumer record. Those people fear that deleting a
password hash would lead to a bad user experience, and user experience
is much more important then security.

In the last years, we have learned that even IT companies like Yahoo or
RockYou do no even hash their user user passwords (sic!).

I repeat, they do NOT hash user passwords. This is the reality. Do you
really think that such companies do even remotely thinking about
deleting password hashes of inactive users?

IMHO we do need web frameworks and userDBs with good default
configurations to protect our passwords. I'm just worried  about the
acceptance of solutions which do automatically delete password hashes
(part of a user record) of inactive users.

Best regards,
Christian









Download attachment "signature.asc" of type "application/pgp-signature" (535 bytes)

