phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] The best of the best, IMO

Message-ID: <20140416132924.GA4870@openwall.com>
Date: Wed, 16 Apr 2014 17:29:24 +0400
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] The best of the best, IMO

On Sun, Apr 13, 2014 at 05:39:48AM -0700, Jeremi Gosney wrote:
On 4/13/2014 12:22 AM, Solar Designer wrote:
However, for this to be of help to PHC decision-making we need
attack-optimized implementations (in addition to defense-optimized
ones), and it's unclear whether JtR community members would have
sufficient incentive for that.

I was hoping that password crackers would jump at an opportunity to
optimize new algorithms, but maybe I'm being too optimistic :)

I think you're being too optimistic, but it doesn't hurt to try - so
please bring this topic up on the john-users list (and actual code
details could be discussed on john-dev, then).

Chances are that almost all of the 23,
if wrapped into JtR formats, will (initially) be using mostly
defense-optimized code for attack, which is suboptimal and does not
(yet) significantly help us answer the questions we need answered.
It is nice extra testing anyway, though.

Well, I think it answers half the question. Knowing how the defense
optimized code performs is significant. And I think using JTR as a
testbed is a decent way to benchmark the defense optimized code, and
provides a good starting point for attackers to start optimizing code.

I agree.

For Pufferfish and battcrypt, I think there may be significant speedup
from interleaving of multiple instances for attack.  Someone needs to
implement that.

Yeah, I was going to implement this in the attack-optimized JTR patch
for Pufferfish, but was short on time. I was able to kind of fake it
with MPI though by running 4 threads per core instead of 2 (CPU has HT),
I think this achieved a similar effect.

No, running more threads than the hardware supports is not at all
similar to the effect achieved by interleaving instructions from
multiple instances within the hardware supported number of threads.

And indeed the memory (de)allocation overhead should be
out of loop for attack as well.  IIRC, you're using alloca() to avoid it
in the JtR patch, correct?

In the attack optimized code I am, yeah. I think this is one of the rare
instances where its use isn't totally inappropriate.

Makes sense.

Also, we need GPU attack implementations.

Agreed, but there's a bit of a logistics problem with that, in that I
highly doubt we're going to be able to get 23 kernels written. Jens has
stated offlist that he plans to write kernels for his 6 favorite
algorithms, maybe we'll all get lucky and his 6 will align with the ones
we feel should be finalists.

This is good news.  OpenCL kernels for 6 of the schemes would be a good
contribution to PHC even if those 6 don't match the list of finalists.

Alexander

