phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Reworked KDF available on github for feedback: NOELKDF

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p56tJW+sXXk8DsnpMTVG+cC_x4Hw8q-SCmAM9ZU6dkNOQ@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Sat, 4 Jan 2014 17:17:52 -0500
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Reworked KDF available on github for feedback: NOELKDF

On Sat, Jan 4, 2014 at 3:07 PM, Solar Designer Your system time usage is a
lot lower.
>
>
What OS and version are you running?
>

Manjaro Linux, which is based on Arch.

No, this sounds wrong.  Per that table, it's 16 instructions peak decode
rate per chip for either chip.  You should compare "Eight Core" FX
(that's AMD's marketing for the 4-module chips) vs. "Quad Core" i7.
>

I found an AMD FX 8 core CPU at work and benchmarked there.  I almost
exactly reproduced your data.  The difference has to be the machines.  I'm
just not sure what the difference is.


[...] I think my server has mood swings, probably related
to temperature.  By the time it runs 2 cores that long, it's already
scaling back the clock.
>
Hardly.  In my experience, recent Intel desktop CPUs almost always run
at max turbo frequency possible for the core count in use, with no
scaling down, and they definitely can't heat up that much in just a few
seconds (it'd take minutes) - well, unless you have no heatsink or
something (but then you'd have bigger problems). ;-)


It may be just the minecraft servers.  It's technically my son's machine,
so I shouldn't complain.


Thanks for the offer.  Unfortunately, I barely have time to complete our
own submission by the end of January, so I definitely won't work on
another one directly at least until then.  Also, it's not as much about
winning as it is about having better KDFs / hashing schemes among those
selected as winners, if any.  I am happy to help you improve yours, such
as by providing advice in this discussion, and your benchmark results,
etc. may also indirectly help improve escrypt.
>

Thanks for all the help so far.  I can't see how escript doesn't make it to
the next stage.  It just makes too much sense to have an improved version
of what we already know well.  Like I said, escript or better, and I'm a
happy camper.  What we really need is adoption by the various tools like
OpenSSL and TrueCrypt.  In the meantime, I'm having some fun with noelkdf.

Bill



