phc-discussions - NoelKDF ready for submission

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p7EMh-5_B4RkntCpMhCOPMa-2FywtmBWoBcYLH5y_teOA@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Wed, 29 Jan 2014 20:53:24 -0500
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Cc: Christian Forler <christian.forler@...-weimar.de>
Subject: NoelKDF ready for submission

I've rehashed NoelKDF to the point that I am now happy with it.  I
would like to go ahead and submit it, but I want to make sure
everyone's OK with it before I do.  I need to get this done and return
my focus to developing low-cost mixed signal ASICs.  The "paper" I've
written is here:

https://github.com/waywardgeek/noelkdf/blob/master/NoelKDF.odt

I've "borrowed" an awful lot from Christian Forler and SolarDesigner.
If either of you guys has any thing you'd like me to change in NoelKDF
or the paper, please let me know.  Since NoelKDF is primarily you two
guy's inspiration, I also would like you to consider being listed as
the top authors, which is an offer I'd like to keep open in the
unlikely event that NoelKDF does get selected.  It would seem crazy
for NoelKDF to go forward leveraging so much from Catena and Escript
without having you both taking credit for it, given most of the good
ideas are yours.  If there is some other way to properly recognise you
guys, just let me know.

I apologies for the weak writing.  I know a lot more about writing
patents than writing papers, and we all know how much fun patents are
to read.  However, I'm happy with the NoelKDF design.  The hybrid
between a pure cache-timing-attack resistant algorithm and a
down-and-dirty read anything you want based on the password algorithm
turned out quite nice, IMO.  I am also excited about the
multiplication based compute-time hardening.  I've implemented a
python version and used it to help debug the C reference version, and
there's a version with pthreads.  I also copied Catena's test-vector
code to make an equivalent tool for producing NoelKDF test vectors.  I
think it now meets the PHC guidelines.

Thanks for all the help.  It's been a ton of fun so far.
Bill

