phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] simplifying yescrypt

Message-ID: <20141021140521.GA10637@openwall.com>
Date: Tue, 21 Oct 2014 18:05:21 +0400
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] simplifying yescrypt

On Tue, Oct 21, 2014 at 12:13:06AM -0400, Bill Cox wrote:
Hypothetically, I can imaging going to work for some huge
corporation... like Google for instance, maybe even in their
authentication group.  In that case, if I were going to internally
promote Yescrypt based password authentication servers, it might be
the case that many of my peers know even less about password hashing
than me.

I think my first challenge would be to convince people of the value of
ROM in the first place.  That's easy - it eliminates botnet attacks.
After that, explaining why we need *two* forms of ROM, and how that
makes password hashes more secure is actually beyond my skill level
right now.

I think the two ROMs setup would be primarily for authentication service
providers - companies for which this is part of their core business.
It's not very hard to explain: it's to require that attack nodes have
reasonably fast access to even more data (TBs rather than GBs) while
also requiring very fast access to the smaller ROM's data (GBs).

With only few (but large scale) potential deployments, I guess this can
in fact be out of the PHC submission.  Just an extra that may be added.

Somehow I feel we need to be able to delegate a proper password hash
with the security of Makwa, while using a 1TiB ROM to defeat botnets,
and only store a user's public key in the user database.  I was told
about the idea of only storing user public keys rather than password
hashes recently, and I think the idea has merit.  However, that means
there is a private key sitting on an average user's cell phone, and
that key needs proper pin/password protection with a good password
hashing algorithm.  I certainly hope we can use a PHC winner for that :-)

Of course that's one of the use cases for PHC candidates.

Alexander

