phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Lyra, Password Key Derivation Based On The Sponge Construction

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p7JbdHzrnWNJYsS7iFrcwobtpPSX4ieUuk0Av8HEy0TDw@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Thu, 9 Jan 2014 10:58:09 -0500
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Lyra, Password Key Derivation Based On The Sponge Construction

On Thu, Jan 9, 2014 at 4:14 AM, Christian Forler <
christian.forler@...-weimar.dewrote:

On 09.01.2014 01:43, Bill Cox wrote:
Sorry about being noisy.  I'm just looking for every opportunity to push
my primary point about the design of memory-hard KDFs: they should be
fast, fill lots of memory, and any CPU cycles wasted on computing a
crypto-strength hash per memory location is a waste of time.
>
"All of our methods for doing this involve finding some function F()
which approximates a random function and which requires roughly 2^t
work to compute." -- https://www.schneier.com/paper-low-entropy.html
>
It is quite hard so show such a behavior for a algorithm F() which is
not based on a cryptographic primitive. Moreover, the random function
approx. property is crucial since a cryptographic key is assumed to be
random.
>

Thanks for the link.  That's actually a paper I read a while back.  I think
it is important to be able to show that significant entropy is not lost
while filling memory with hash data.  However, the data written to memory
does not need to be as indistinguishable from true random data as the final
derived key.

There is a simple way to achieve derived keys that are indistinguishable
from true random data in systems where the data written to memory is easily
distinguished from true random data.  Simply use a trusted cryptographic
hash on the pasword in the beginning to create an intermediate derived key.
 If the password is used to create data we write to memory, then do another
iteration of the trusted hash to create the data used in filling memory so
that it is not correlated in any way with the intermediate key.  Once
memory hashing is complete, simply XOR it's result onto the derived key and
then compute the trusted hash of this to create the final derived key.  No
matter how non-random the computed memory based hash is, it cannot hurt the
apparent randomness of the derived key.  Also, no significant entropy is
lost.

SFAIK, there's no reason memory needs to appear truly random.  For example,
if Alexander were to use Salsa20/20 instead of Salsa20/8 in escrypt, but
instead of writing out only the resulting hash he wrote out every
intermediate computed value (there are very many values computed in
Salsa20/20), he could easily fill memory as rapidly as he liked.  Entropy
is collected in the end by pseudo-randomly hashing all of memory together,
so there's no reason memory needs to appear random.

Bill



