phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Can I have two entries?

Message-ID: <20140323141311.GA28781@openwall.com>
Date: Sun, 23 Mar 2014 18:13:11 +0400
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Can I have two entries?

On Sun, Mar 23, 2014 at 01:49:39PM +0100, Thomas Pornin wrote:
I'd say that what matters is how "different" the entries are from each
other. Authorship is mostly irrelevant.

I fully agree with this, and with the rest of what you said in this
message.  Thank you!

As a final note, I must state that the final packaging, where you put
together the specification and reference code and test vectors, and
adjust all the details so that the specification is clear and readable
and the code works well and is portable, that final stretch implies a
substantial amount of effort and time, and is often underestimated(*). I
write these lines on March 23rd, 8 days before the deadline. If you are
preparing a submission and are still tweaking the algorithm, then you
are in trouble. If you want to push two submissions, then you are twice
as much in trouble.

Right.  I am in trouble for still tweaking escrypt without having a
complete submission package.  I realize perfectly well that I am behind
schedule.  escrypt is just not ready for PHC yet given the full set of
requirements I currently have for it (are post-submission let's say
"major tweaks" OK?), and it might happen that escrypt won't be among the
submissions to PHC in the end if I am still not sufficiently happy with
it by the submission deadline (although I am going to try hard to
introduce the remaining planned features/properties in the last week),
or if there's simply not enough time left to submit it properly.  Either
way, the discussions in here have been extremely helpful, and I intend
to continue with escrypt regardless of whether it becomes a PHC
submission or not (although I realize that if not it might not receive
as much scrutiny, which would be very unfortunate).  I have specific
uses for escrypt that I think other PHC candidates discussed so far are
less appropriate for.

Alexander

