phc-discussions - PHC finalists tweaks (SUBMITTERS, please read carefully)

Message-ID: <CAGiyFdfBSNLqdLy32ZtWV5xZoecESc=S8F5r0q-oV4679P9FQg@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Tue, 9 Dec 2014 15:38:54 +0100
From: Jean-Philippe Aumasson <jeanphilippe.aumasson@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: PHC finalists tweaks (SUBMITTERS, please read carefully)

As announced yesterday the PHC panel selected 9 finalists: Argon,
battcrypt, Catena, Lyra2, Makwa, Parallel, POMELO, Pufferfish,
yescrypt.

Finalists are an intermediate shortlist before the final selection of
one or more winners around Q2 2015.

Submitters of a finalist are now given a chance to make minor changes
to their algorithm: Submitters have until January 31, 2015 to submit
the final version of their algorithm. If the final version is
identical to the current version, submitters don't need to send
anything. If the final version differs from the current version,
submitters should send an email to submissions@...sword-hashing.net
including:

* a revised submission package (including updated specs and reference
implementation); either as an attachment or as a URL

* a description of the tweak proposed and some rationale for this tweak

The panel will examine the proposed tweak and will then respond
whether or not the final version of the algorithm is accepted.

There's no formal definition of an acceptable tweak, but we plan to
accept any change that does not change fundamentally the algorithm.
For example, the tweak may consist in replacing BLAKE2 by SHA-512 as a
core primitive; in replacing a XOR by an ADD in some internal
algorithm; in changing the number of rounds of some function from 10
to 12; etc.

We also encourage submitters to polish the submission document and the
reference implementation of their algorithm. The clearer and the more
convincing, the easier it will be for the panel to understand the
merits of the algorithm and to assess it fairly against other
submissions.

Inquiries to the panel may be addressed to this (public) mailing list,
or to the private distribution list panel@...sword-hashing.net.


Thank you!

