phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Quick gripe... in case there's ever another contest

Message-ID: <20140405181410.GA7809@bolet.org>
Date: Sat, 5 Apr 2014 20:14:10 +0200
From: Thomas Pornin <pornin@...et.org>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Quick gripe... in case there's ever another contest

On Sat, Apr 05, 2014 at 01:12:21PM -0400, Bill Cox wrote:
I'm having fun compiling all the various schemes, but I have had to
hand-modify most of them to get them to be compatible with my main.c.
It's no biggie, but a bit of a pain.  If you guys influence future
competitions, could you please include a main.c and possibly even an
example project that successfully builds using it?  Maybe we should
have required linux compatible makefiles, and that make PHS generate
an executable using the shared main.c file?

For SHA-3, NIST had published a specific API:
  http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/hash/documents/SHA3-C-API.pdf
and also the source code for a generator for test vectors:
  http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/hash/sha-3/Submission_Reqs/test_vectors.html
which uses that API. Thus, the code from submitters HAD to compile
with that common, specific program.

This did not result in portable and easily reusable code, though. NIST
had defined a single "reference platform", which was Windows Vista
Ultimate, on an Intel Core2 CPU, in 32-bit and 64-bit mode, and the
compiler was Microsoft Visual Studio 2005. Alas, not everybody has such
hardware or software; a lot of researchers have Unix-like workstations,
in particular Linux, so no Visual Studio; they developed with gcc. This
implied some issues when NIST tried to compile the code, because the
developers had unwillingly used gcc extensions that Visual Studio 2005
does not support, or supports differently (and a few of these
"extensions" are actually very standard constructions, but Visual Studio
is known to lag quite a lot when it comes to standard conformance).

The same problem occurred in the opposite direction: code which compiled
and ran properly with Visual Studio could fail to compile, or produce
incorrect output, when processed with gcc.

More insidiously, some candidate codes used "dangerous" code patterns
which resulted in breakage when used on a big-endian machine, or when
compiled with different optimisation flags (C's strict aliasing rules
are rarely well understood). Also, a number of candidate implementations
used static read-write variables, resulting in code which was not
thread-safe, or even stateful code (hash the same buffer twice from the
same program, and you don't get the same output...).


Bottom-line is that people who are good at designing cryptographic
algorithms are not necessarily good at implementing them into sane,
portable, no-surprise library code. It is a different set of skills.
Even the NIST API somehow compromised that goal, by requiring all
candidates to define functions with the same names, thus precluding
compilation of several candidates within the same binary (and the PHC
API also has the same issue, since it requires all candidates to define
a function called PHS()).

Bottom-line of the bottom-line is that if you want such implementations,
you often have to do it yourself. There is value in producing portable
implementations with a unified API, that are friendly to library usage.
I did such a work for SHA-3:
   http://www.saphir2.com/sphlib/
but it took me quite some time and effort. I don't exactly intend to
do it again for PHC...


(In fact, my opinion is that a _reference_ implementation, meant to test
other implementations for correctness, should be done in a language
which does NOT have undefined or architecture-dependent behaviour. C
should be banned for that; reference implementations should be in Java
or C#, or ideally something even stricter because even Java or C# may
offer non-portable behaviour when using floating-point types.)


	--Thomas Pornin

