phc-discussions - escrypt rename (Re: [PHC] Scrypt can have highest time*average memory cost)

Message-ID: <20140329025851.GA31707@openwall.com>
Date: Sat, 29 Mar 2014 06:58:51 +0400
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: escrypt rename (Re: [PHC] Scrypt can have highest time*average memory cost)

Bill,

Thank you for commenting on this!

I should have announced the yescrypt name in the proper thread, to have
this followup in there too. ;-)

On Fri, Mar 28, 2014 at 10:40:06PM -0400, Bill Cox wrote:
However, I still have gut reactions.  My dumb thought at the moment is
that I prefer pwxform to yescript.  Pwxform can mean Parallel Wide
Transform, but most of us will just say "password transform" in our
heads.  Yescript

It's spelled yescrypt, not yescript.  The latter name is taken by some
unrelated website.  Not great to have this near-collision, indeed, but
even if it weren't present now, it would be later.

in my head is pronounced "Yes-script".

Well, and escrypt would have been pronounced e-script.  And scrypt might
be pronounced script.  So what.

I don't know why, but I prefer "password transform".

I am already using pwxform for a component in yescrypt.  I needed a
name for that component anyway, and pwxform fits nicely.  I thought of
a certain other name along the lines of "password transform" for the
whole thing, but I think it better fits as a library name
(implementation, and possibly of more than just this hashing scheme)
than as a password hashing scheme name.  It's not sufficiently specific
for the latter, whereas for a library with assorted schemes in it that
would actually be an advantage.  So I'll keep that other naming idea
reserved in case we do release such a library later.

yescrypt also includes homage/hint to scrypt, which is natural to have
as long as it's able to compute classic scrypt hashes (as well as its
native ones).

That said, I also don't like yescrypt as much as I would have liked to
like a name for this scheme.  We simply failed to arrive at a better
name in the available time.

This rename is already in place, and I am not going to spend any of the
time remaining before the deadline on another rename.

Alexander

