phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] escrypt memory access speed (Re: [PHC] Reworked KDF
 available on github for feedback: NOELKDF)

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p78zqvVXwCN1h4kV4_REHUaWFbgV0L+4dTtKNNfWAUfiA@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Sun, 12 Jan 2014 07:45:25 -0500
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] escrypt memory access speed (Re: [PHC] Reworked KDF
 available on github for feedback: NOELKDF)

On Sat, Jan 11, 2014 at 11:47 PM, Andy Lutomirski <luto@...capital.netwrote:
To be clear, I was thinking about the possibility of hammering cache
and main memory at the same time.  Imagine some matrix multiplies or
other cache-heavy operations needed to select the next memory index to
access.  If you could get 30 or 40 GB/sec and, say, 100GB/sec to L2,
you'd probably be doing even better.  (No clue whether this is
possible -- I'm not at all sure whether modern CPUs can sustain that
much bandwidth anywhere.  Something that depends on low-latency access
to a block of cache might be a better bet.)
>
--Andy

That might be an improvement.  I guess matrix multiplies would be good
for machines with large vector processors.  I don't know how much
vector processing hardware our CPUs have, but I doubt it's enough to
justify the additional complexity.  Security is partly about the KISS
rule, I think.

Generally, people refer to me as a "router guy."  I've written a lot
of routers to connect stuff on chips.  One mistake I see over and over
when people come up with ideas for improving the speed of computation
is forgetting to take the routing penalties into account.  For
example, data flow machines would have dominated decades ago if not
for data routing delays.

Our CPUs are stuck with tremendous routing delays that just don't
exist on an ASIC when computing our inner-loops.  Any attempt to
protect passwords with computation-limited inner loops is not going to
get us very far.

If I really wanted to force an attacker to have a nice expensive CPU
like mine, I would fill instruction memory with pseudo-random
instructions.  Java is everywhere, so we could generate a megabyte of
bytecode in a way that we know it will execute a certain number of
hashing instructions before returning a hash result.  An attacker
would have to execute the code to make a password guess, and there's
no way he's going to execute that code faster than an Intel or AMD
CPU.  That would destroy his speed advantage, and we could still
hammer memory to reduce his cost advantage.  That would be awesome.

However, that complicates the algorithm dramatically, hurts
portability, and brings all the security holes in Java to our password
KDF.  I think the security experts' heads would explode if we tried to
standardize such a KDF.

I think the next significant layer of protection after off-chip memory
should be using GPUs for KDF.  Most smart phones and likely all future
desktop and laptop CPUs have significant GPU hardware, and we could
use that in parallel with hashing external memory.  That's why I think
a KDF should be designed with an adjustable parallelism parameter.

Bill

