phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Initial hashing function. Feedback welcome

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p7BReFfAkcPKQmyt3syZX1cEBb3cHT4aVuap4cwdQSxBw@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Sun, 5 Jan 2014 08:57:52 -0500
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Initial hashing function. Feedback welcome

On Sat, Jan 4, 2014 at 11:06 PM, Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.comwrote:

On Tue, Dec 31, 2013 at 08:46:08AM -0500, Bill Cox wrote:
I haven't added this to keystretch, but should we have another work
parameter for how hard to push the CPUs?
>
Maybe.


I did some more work on noelkdf based on feedback.  One thing I did was use
t_cost as an outer loop on the whole thing, other than the initial key
hashing.  This makes it possible to add more rounds later, strengthening a
password hash, without knowing the password.  This might be useful to
server admins.


I just used the default build on Arch Linux for scrypt. The
files crypto_scrypt-nosse.c and crypto_scrypt-sse.c are identical,
>
Huh?!  No, they're different in scrypt-1.1.6.tgz.


Oops... my bad.  I must have goofed my command line diff.  That makes sense
now.


One reason for keeping random writes in L1 cache, other than speed, is to
reduce information leakage about the key, just in case someone is able to
detect cache miss timing.
>
Do you think random writes are more leaky than random reads?  Why?
I think these are about the same in terms of cache timing attacks.
So if you do random reads anyway, you won't defeat cache timing attacks
by avoiding random writes.


No, reads and writes are the same.

I think L2 cache misses that cause us to load from DRAM are more obvious
than an L1 cache miss, but if we pre-load a "page" into L1, there shouldn't
be any cache misses there.  The L2 misses are more of a problem, especially
since I load a random page for each page written to RAM.  If an attacker
knows the expected sequence of L2 cache misses, he can abort hashing of an
incorrect password guess early and move to the next guess.  I'm tempted to
try and insure that every random page loaded causes a cache miss, but I
haven't figured out how to do that.

Another drawback is the very low probability that the last few V
elements written will ever be accessed.
>

I did some more thinking about this.  The last few V are no biggie, but if
an attacker can drop something significant, like the last 10%, then that's
an issue.  However, the last 10% is probably quite a few pages, and on
average, they have a 5% chance of needing pages that the attacker dropped.
 For example, when hashing 2GB with 16KB pages, there are 128K pages.  If
an attacker tries not to write the last 1% to RAM, it's 13,000 pages.
 While generating these last 13,000 pages, each one on average has a .05%
chance of needing a missing previous page.  He'll almost certainly have to
recompute most of the missing pages, losing any advantage.

So, I don't think the access pattern is a problem.  It's actually better
than scrypt, because it's harder for an attacker to gain advantage by not
storing all the pages in RAM.

- 2048 rounds of PBKDF2_SHA256 are used at the start to generate an
intermediate derived key.
>
I dislike this.  It's very wasteful in use cases where our total
running
time is very limited.  This may be all running time we can afford (if
at
all), not leaving any time for the memory-hard portion.
>

I made this configurable now in noelkdf.  It's selectable from 1 to any
32-bit int.
 Why do we care about the first few milliseconds?

>
Because there exist real-world use cases where the total duration is
limited to a few milliseconds.


I think for these cases, the server admin can set my new "parallelism"
parameter to 1, and just do 1 initial SHA-256 hash round.  He wont be able
to fill much memory, though.  My preference in these cases is to let the
user's do some hashing in his browser or app as well, to improve password
security, but clearly that cannot always be done.

NOELKDF is currently worse than bcrypt (at least as it relates to
attacks with GPUs) at such low running times, though - for reasons
unrelated to the initial PBKDF2.


I've added a "parallelism" parameter as you suggested to address this, and
I'd love to hear what you think of the scheme.  It hashes "segments" within
the current "page", and the parallelism parameter just says how big the
segments are.  Each computation within a segment can be done in parallel,
but the address of the segment is computed from the current segment, so
segments have to be computed sequentially.

One mystery is why I continue to gain benefit from more parallelism well
beyond 16.  64 runs quite a bit faster than 32.


You're right in pointing out that even 2048+ iterations of SHA-256 is
not of much help, though.  So if we do such pre-hashing before starting
to fill memory for real, maybe we should do something along the lines of
bcrypt or bcrypt_pbkdf, so that we make use of the L1 cache:
>
http://www.tedunangst.com/flak/post/bcrypt-pbkdf
http://www.openbsd.org/cgi-bin/cvsweb/src/lib/libutil/bcrypt_pbkdf.c
>
A drawback is added complexity.  Another drawback is deviating from
usage of a NIST-approved primitive, unless we do the SHA-256 as well.


I really would prefer to keep noelkdf as simple as possible.  That and
speed are it's two strengths, and I'd hate to lose one of them.  Maybe I
should make the pre-hash configurable, passed in as a callback function?

I've been using SHA256 to initialize the first page of memory.  I'm going
to simply copy the intermediate derived key to the first page instead,
since there are cases where generating 16KB of SHA256 would be too slow.


- The derived key does not depend on the number of threads
>
... as long as the number of threads is not greater than a
pre-specified
maximum.  I can claim this too. ;-)  And scrypt can claim it too,
although with scrypt there's a reduction in area-time from increasing
p,
so it better not be done unnecessarily.
>
Good point!  For some reason I though scrypt's result changed with p.
>
It does change with p, but so does the result of NOELKDF with change of
your hard-coded max supported thread count.


Yes, indeed.  I have not found a good way to quickly fill memory with
multiple threads which does not result in a different hash.  I thought my
spin-lock solution was clever, but it was too slow...  This is definitely
an advantage of escrypt.

Bill



