phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] patents

Message-ID: <CAOLP8p6q_btGbXJTuTWMsoDykuGObBvLYh2KB1umeBJ4Bvuoaw@mail.gmail.com>
Date: Sat, 18 Jul 2015 16:14:14 -0700
From: Bill Cox <waywardgeek@...il.com>
To: "discussions@...sword-hashing.net" <discussions@...sword-hashing.net>
Subject: Re: [PHC] patents

On Sat, Jul 18, 2015 at 12:22 PM, Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.comwrote:

On Thu, Jul 16, 2015 at 02:17:30PM -0700, Bill Cox wrote:
I think Jeremy might be able to rework his patent into a "business-model"
patent.  I am not personally aware of anyone offering to do the password
hashing with a central ROM under the control of another company that
provides this as a service.  This is what I think his company does.
Assuming he wants to carve out this space narrowly, he might be able to
convince the patent office to allow his patent with the additional steps
of
transmitting the salted password hash over the Internet from a client
company to the company providing the ROM hashing service, after the first
hashing the password with a secret salt which is never transmitted.  I
think Jeremy's main idea which _might_ be new is securing the password
hash
with secret salt before transmitting it to an untrusted ROM-based hashing
service.  It's not a bad idea, but it is not what he patented.
>
I wouldn't be happy with seeing this patented either, in part since I
was also thinking in the same direction back in 2012, and I am still
considering starting a business like this myself.  Now that I have
learned of Jeremy's patent and the older one, I felt I'd have to focus
solely on the delegation and port-hardness aspects, with non-secret ROM.
As an extra and a partial mitigation of making the ROM non-secret, I
think using a secret key that is not part of the large ROM would still
be OK.


Well, if you base your company in Russia, I doubt any US software patents
will keep you from running your business for most non-US customers.  Oh,
the joys of software patents... Consider it a gift from the US to our
competitors who are sane enough to ignore our software patents :)


His patent
covers any sane use of ROM in password hashing, and therefore is invalid
due to prior art.
>
It is not my understanding that any sane use of ROM in password hashing
is covered by the patent(s).  I think port-hardness with a non-secret
ROM is not covered.  But I am not a patent lawyer.
>
Alexander
>

I agree.  It is only the use with secret ROM that seems to be covered, and
the 2006 patent covers this ground anyway.

Bill



