phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Maximising Pseudo-Entropy versus resistance to Side-Channel Attacks

Message-ID: <20150504180927.GA21330@openwall.com>
Date: Mon, 4 May 2015 21:09:27 +0300
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Maximising Pseudo-Entropy versus resistance to Side-Channel Attacks

On Mon, May 04, 2015 at 07:32:37PM +0200, Stefan.Lucks@...-weimar.de wrote:
On Mon, 4 May 2015, Solar Designer wrote:

>I just recalled an earlier discussion in here where Christian Forler
>felt it was OK for Catena to absolutely rely on salt uniqueness for a
>feature, and I felt otherwise:
>
>http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.comp.security.phc/612/focus=659
>
>While uniqueness isn't randomness, the similarity is in strong reliance
>on a property of the salts.
>
>I think this shows my pragmatism.  When this kind of reliance isn't
>absolutely required for a security feature (there was another way to
>specify the feature in question), I am against it.  When there's a
>tradeoff between a not-yet-practically-relevant weakness and a currently
>practically relevant one, I may well choose to accept the former and
>mitigate the latter.
>
>Arguably, this also shows Catena team's inconsistency. ;-)

I see the smiley, but I don't get the joke.

The smiley means that I am not being entirely serious about that
statement.  I realize that it's a stretch.  Especially now that I found
you actually have uuid as a separate input from salt.

This is wrong for two reasons:

Firstly, there is a simple logical implication, which holds for all salts 
of decent sizes (like 128 bit for PHC):

    If the salt is random
    then it is unique (except with negligible probability).

Thus, by relaxing the requirement (from random to unique) we get a 
stronger scheme. And by inverting the requirement (from unique to random) 
you get a weaker scheme.

As I wrote, "the similarity is in strong reliance on a property of the
salts".  I didn't mean to imply it's a similarly strong property.  You
are correct that it isn't.

You try to generate a counterexample to the logical implication

No.

by discussing 12-bit salts from old unix crypt. But this is 2015 and PHC, 
unix crypt is history.

I referred to the historical example because you (quite reasonably)
insist on salts only being expected to possess whatever properties they
possessed historically.

I am opposing you in this thread for the sake of achieving a balanced
discussion of the topic, by putting our arguments to test.

Secondly, Christian has actually been pointing out the development for 
encryption and authenticated encryption. Initially, many (mostly 
un-authenticated) encryption schemes assumed a random "initial value". 
Later, authors of encryption schemes just assumed unique nonces. By 
weakening the schemes, they got stronger cryptography. Currently, the 
discussion among cryptographers is about robust schemes: Even if you 
assume a unique nonce for authenticated encryption, does it make sense to 
maximise the remaining security you can preserve if nonces are 
accidentally reused?

I don't see what you're arguing with here.  My point in that old
discussion I referred to was precisely that Catena's hash encryption
feature could be made more robust by not relying on unique IDs (and
instead using a block cipher).  Catena team opted for simplicity vs.
(theoretical) robustness.  This may be reasonable, since simplicity (not
needing an extra crypto primitive, nor building an own one out of a
hash) may result in more robust implementations.

The "inconsistency" I mentioned is that Catena team does not always opt
for greater (theoretical) robustness.

Of course, the Catena team consists of different human beings which may 
have different opinions on some issues, or even change their opinion over 
time. Maybe, that is what the smiley was about?

I did have this thought too, but the smiley is primarily about the
statement not being entirely serious.

Alexander

