phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Another PHC candidates "mechanical" tests (ROUND2)

Message-ID: <20150331094117.GA2359@openwall.com>
Date: Tue, 31 Mar 2015 12:41:17 +0300
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Another PHC candidates "mechanical" tests (ROUND2)

Hi Hongjun,

On Tue, Mar 31, 2015 at 11:11:59AM +0800, Hongjun Wu wrote:
First, I'd like to point out that the security of preimage/collision of
Pomelo (and some PHC Second round candidates) is somehow similar to the
security of the initialization of stream ciphers, rather than similar to
the security of hash function in which there is no secret key.

When I was designing POMELO, the first priority is to ensure that the
password cannot be recovered due to collision (it follows from my
experience on the cryptanalysis and design of stream ciphers).  It is the
reason that the first half operations of POMELO are strictly revertible so
as to prevent collision, but to achieve diffusion.

Some confusion/diffusion idea of POMELO partly comes from my stream cipher
HC (i.e., using expansion and table lookups).  Since its publication in
2004, HC remains as a very strong cipher.

Thank you for this additional detail.  It helps.  It's actually mostly
not me who you need to convince, but first the PHC panel as a whole and
then users of POMELO.  When deciding on the winners, the PHC panel will
consider not only whether the panel members themselves are convinced of
a PHC finalist's security, but also whether it'd be convincing to
prospective adopters of the scheme.

Anyway, I will provide more analysis of POMELO in the updated report.

This will be very helpful.

BTW, I think that it is not necessary to use strong crypto primitive (such
as strong hash function) in the design of password  hashing scheme,
especially if we want to process large amount of memory in a fast way.

Right.  The PHC panel understands this too, which is why e.g. POMELO
made it to finalists.

Eventually it turns out that a number of second round candidates need to
cut the round number significantly.   I feel that it is no longer true that
those PHC candidates are based on strong crypto primitives, although they
are still very strong.

Maybe we can now say that most of the second round candidates are no longer
built on strong crypto primitives (such as strong hash functions or strong
block ciphers) to achieve their security,  not just POMELO itself.

You're right, it's not just POMELO.

Alexander

