phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Argon2

Message-ID: <20150505134954.GA25458@openwall.com>
Date: Tue, 5 May 2015 16:49:54 +0300
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Argon2

On Tue, May 05, 2015 at 01:06:56PM +0200, Dmitry Khovratovich wrote:
We appreciate the panel's decision.

Argon2 will become even better. We plan to add new features and
security enhancements in a post-PHC tweak. The tweak will contain:

I think PHC should accept tweaks to finalists, now including to Argon2.
Otherwise, expecting post-PHC tweaks to the same schemes is a (minor?)
reason for PHC not to select those schemes as winners, as we'd expect
fragmentation (e.g., "Argon2 is a PHC winner, but the Argon2 team now
recommends Argon2+tweaks for actual use").

I hope the PHC panel will agree to accept tweaks, or better yet will
request specific tweaks from designers, so we won't have to discriminate
against post-PHC-tweaks-expected finalists.

 - new indexing function, that makes the memory access pattern more
uniform and also strengthens the TMTO resistance. We are currently
working out the best solution by
calculating the penalties for various existing (Bill's distancecubed,
Solar's sliding window) and our own indexing functions using the
improved version of the ranking tradeoff algorithm.

Sounds good.

 - new internal permutation that uses integer multiplication for
hardening and chains the subblocks in the way that maximizes the
non-tradeoff latency.

Will it also include bcrypt-like rapid lookups?

Will the chaining of sub-blocks be tunable?

I think my suggested MAXFORM chain was almost ready for inclusion, with
only S-box initialization and overwrites needing to be added.
It'd avoid the need for you to chain the sub-blocks, so would be more
scalable (when that parallelism is eventually needed on future CPUs,
it'd be right there - just decrease the MAXFORM chain length to reduce
the latency bottleneck and use the parallelism).

We plan to finish these ideas by the end of the month. The design
rationale will be published, as usual.

Sounds great.  Especially the timing.

Today, however, we are proud to announce a feature for Argon2, that
makes it suitable for cryptocurrencies. Namely, it enables fast,
memoryless verification in a non-interactive way. In a concrete
example, a proof for running 3-pass Argon2 using 2 GB of RAM is only
500 KB in size and the verifier has to just hash (with Blake2) the
string of about the same size, i.e. this takes milliseconds.

The full paper is available here
https://www.cryptolux.org/images/9/95/Fast_memory_hard.pdf , and this
new feature is described in Section 8. You do not need to know many
details about Argon2 to read it.

Interesting.  I'll plan to take a look when I have time.

Thank you!

Alexander

