phc-discussions - "Attack on the iterative compression function"

Message-ID: <20150414222930.GA7015@openwall.com>
Date: Wed, 15 Apr 2015 01:29:30 +0300
From: Solar Designer <solar@...nwall.com>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: "Attack on the iterative compression function"

This is another great contribution by the Argon team, which I think
hasn't received its due attention in here yet.

Please see the Argon2 paper, page 13 (in current revision).

Of PHC finalists, this might be relevant to battcrypt, Catena, Lyra2,
yescrypt.  (And to original Argon?  But I hope we'll accept Argon2, and
won't need to consider the original Argon anymore.)

I had thought of such attacks on scrypt and yescrypt before (such as
when trying to come up with a reason for scrypt's sub-block shuffling,
which didn't appear to help against such attacks anyway), but I think
it's the first time this is written down and the first time it's
combined with Argon team's other TMTO analysis.  This was much needed.

Dmitry - you claim that "[...] it allows to reduce the memory by the
factor of 12 or even higher while still reducing the area-time product."
Since table 2.1 only goes to 1/11, for depth 32.8, and you say that "In
concrete proposals, s can be 64, 128, 256 and even larger", I guess this
"factor of 12" applies to the next column in the table (not shown),
where depth would presumably be in the 32.8 to 64 range?  Do I interpret
this correctly?

yescrypt's currently recommended r is 8 (for 1 KB blocks), and the
sub-block size is 64 bytes.  So in the terms of your paper, it's s = 16.
However, the attack would appear to rely not only on the last
sub-blocks, but also on occasional full blocks, so I don't see how it'd
improve upon the higher-level TMTO attack alone.  The last sub-block of
output of each BlockMix_pwxform depends on the entire input block, and
if you never store entire blocks then you'd need to restart computation
from block 0 in order to reach a block's last sub-block.

Does yescrypt fit your model for this attack, and why or why not?

We'll need to similarly check other PHC finalists for this.  Hopefully,
none of them fit.

Thanks!

Alexander

