phc-discussions - Re: [PHC] Competition process

Message-ID: <552D25AA.6050501@larc.usp.br>
Date: Tue, 14 Apr 2015 11:35:22 -0300
From: Marcos Simplicio <mjunior@...c.usp.br>
To: discussions@...sword-hashing.net
Subject: Re: [PHC] Competition process

On 14-Apr-15 09:08, Solar Designer wrote:
On Tue, Apr 14, 2015 at 01:08:37PM +0200, Jean-Philippe Aumasson wrote:
>Personally I like Argon2 a lot, in part for its relative simplicity,
>and wouldn't object to considering it as eligible if a critical mass
>of panel members also approves.

I approve.

>(Then I expect some other submitters to complain that it isn't "fair".)

Yes.  Quoting my reply to you on the panel list on February 3:

"I'd expect complaints from other finalists.

This is unfair to them in that they had expected their more-than-tweaks
would not be accepted, so did not even try to submit such.  It would
have been preferable for us to state that we'd be willing to accept
"major changes" rather than merely "tweaks" when we announced the
finalists in December, if we're in fact to accept Argon2.  Then it'd be
fair to other finalists.

However, given the actual finalists we have, I would be surprised if
they actually wanted to make major changes.  OTOH, I was surprised by
Argon2 being introduced.  So I could be wrong.

With just 9 finalists, one way to handle this is to ask authors of the
remaining 8 whether they have objections.  I don't, so this leaves 7 to ask."

... and we've just seen Catena's approval as well, so only 6 left, if we
choose to use this approach.

>Let's see what other panel members have to say.

Yes, and other submitters too.

Well, since it was asked: Lyra2's team is with what the panel believes
to be the best approach, whatever that may be (and also whether or not
our vote counts ;) )

Actually, there is a point in any competition in which it is hard not to
think "if only these guys had worked together from the start, we
probably would have a much better solution combining their ideas". But
since humans seem to bring better ideas to the table when they are
competing instead of when they are at a "task force", competitions do
have their purpose...

Maybe the said task force would be the natural step after the
competition declares its winner(s) (?). We would surely enjoy being part
of that.


